Jordan Rowley: Welcome to the NIH/NIGMS Sandbox module for the analysis of chromatin occupancy using ChIP-seq, CUT&RUN, or CUT&Tag.
Jordan Rowley: In this module you will learn how to perform the bioinformatics of differential chromatin occupancy using data generated by three well-known high-throughput sequencing assays,
Jordan Rowley: including the differences between each assay, as well as the integration of chromatin accessibility and differential gene expression.
Jordan Rowley: This pipeline tutorial will analyze published ChIP-seq, CUT&RUN, and CUT&Tag datasets that profile the occupancy of BAF, histone modifications, and RNA polymerase II under conditions that deplete BAF or inhibit transcription.
Jordan Rowley: As such, this module covers the processing, and differential analysis of three distinct but similar methods.
Jordan Rowley: We’ll also be comparing these data to RNA-seq and ATAC-seq in mESCs after BAF inhibition.
Jordan Rowley: The original data sets can be found in corresponding publications and GEO repositories that are referenced within the modules themselves.
Jordan Rowley: Note: To allow faster processing we have downsampled the data and limited the reads to that of a single chromosome (chr4).
Jordan Rowley: The example data we will use relates to the role of BAF in chromatin remodeling, and we will explore the occupancy of H3K27ac, initiated RNA Polymerase II, and BAF.
Jordan Rowley: BAF is a chromatin remodeler involved in governing nucleosome positioning which provides a context for chromatin accessibility and the recruitment of RNA Polymerase.
Jordan Rowley: As such. The example analysis explores these relationships.
Jordan Rowley: There are several reasons to explore the occupancy of proteins on chromatin.
Jordan Rowley: ChIP-seq, CUT&RUN, and CUT&Tag represent three high-throughput sequencing approaches to profile chromatin occupancy genome-wide.
Jordan Rowley: These approaches have been used to measure histone modifications, RNA polymerases, architectural proteins, and transcription factors, to name a few.
Jordan Rowley: These approaches use an antibody to selectively isolate DNA fragments bound by a protein of interest.
Jordan Rowley: While these three approaches share some similarities, there are differences that should be taken into consideration when planning experiments and during the analysis of the data.
Jordan Rowley: Most ChIP-seq protocols start with chemical cross-linking to stabilize protein DNA complexes
Jordan Rowley: Chromatin is then sonicated to produce short fragments.
Jordan Rowley: Next, an antibody is used in conjunction with protein A/G conjugated beads to immunoprecipitate DNA fragments that were bound by the protein of interest.
Jordan Rowley: These immunoprecipitates are then de-crosslinked, DNA is purified, undergoes sequencing library preparation, PCR amplification, and sequencing.
Jordan Rowley: CUT&RUN
In CUT&RUN, cells (or nuclei) are stabilized using concavalin beads, after which an antibody is used to direct protein A/G MNase, where it will cut the DNA directly next to the protein of interest. These fragments are collected, undergo sequencing library preparation, PCR amplification, and sequencing.
Jordan Rowley: after which an antibody is used to direct protein A/G MNase, where it will cut the DNA directly. Next to the protein of interest.
Jordan Rowley: These fragments are collected, undergo sequencing library preparation, PCR amplification, and sequencing.
Jordan Rowley: CUT&Tag
In CUT&Tag, an antibody is used to direct protein A/G Tn5,
Jordan Rowley: a transpose that inserts short adapters into the DNA directly next to where the protein of interest is bound.
Jordan Rowley: This simultaneously fragments the DNA and adds adapters, allowing direct sequencing library preparation by PCR amplification.
Jordan Rowley: In this module, we’ll teach how to analyze ChIP-seq, CUT&RUN, and CUT&Tag. For an overview of the modules and their implementation, please watch our other video embedded in the github readme.
Jordan Rowley: We hope you enjoy this module and thank the support provided by the NIH/NIGMS Sandbox Program as a supplemental award to the INBRE Program award P20 GM103427.